---
title: The mathematics of Zeno's paradox
date: 2017-11-07
excerpt: "cutting distances to pieces"
header:
  overlay_image: /images/math.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.5
use_math: true
---

Zeno's paradox goes like this.

An arrow is shot from a target at a distance. In order for the arrow to reach its target, it has to travel half the distance first. Then, once it has done so, it must proceed to travel half of the remaining distance. And then half of the remaining distance, and so on, and so forth. It would therefore seem like the arrow, having to travel and *infinite amount of places*, should never reach its target. This is contrary to common sense, hence the paradox.

Modern mathematics offers an solution to this puzzle in the concept of limits.

Although it is true that the arrow travels an infinite amount of segment along its trajectory, it will also travel smaller segments quicker. Eventually, infinitesimal segments are visited during an infinitesimal amount of time. 

This can be stated using the language of series.

Working in units in which the numerical value of the distance between the target and the starting position is equal to one and assuming, for the sake of simplicity, that the arrow travels that unit of length at a constant velocity in one unit of time, the sequence of intervals described above is
$$
\frac{1}{2},\frac{1}{4},\frac{1}{8},\frac{1}{16},\dots
$$
each following term being half its predecessor. The entirity of this sequence can be summarised in the following form
$$
\left(\frac{1}{2^n}\right)_{n\in\mathbb{N}_0}
$$
In order to recover the complete distance, one sums over all the terms in the sequence. This gives a series well-known to mathematicians as a particular instance of a *geometrical progression*. The series converges to a real value
$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\frac{1}{2^n}=1
$$
All is well as we have just recovered the value of the complete length traveled by the arrow.

It should be obvious that the result should not depend on the particular way you choose to divide your complete interval. For example, if one wishes to divide it in successive "thirds of thre remaining distance", one ought to arrive to the same conclusion.

One evening, we were discussing this with some friends of mine who happen to be mathematicians and we realised that the issue required a tiny bit more caution than we had originally thought.

Take the example of "dividing in thirds". It is really tempting to guess that the sequence of intervals to consider should be successive power of $\frac{1}{3}$. Summing over the terms of such a sequence would, however, give the wrong result
$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\frac{1}{3^n}=\frac{1}{2}
$$
The error comes from our lack of care in constructing the series. The above actually represents the fact of travelling successive powers of *a third of the original distance*. Whereas, what we really meant to express the fact that, at each step, the arrow is travelling *a third of the distance left to be travelled*. One then ought to evaluate such distance at each step.

Constructing the first few terms of our sequence therefore goes like this
$$
\begin{align}
1^\text{st} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{3},\\
2^\text{nd} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{3}(1-\frac{1}{3})=\frac{2}{9}\\
3^\text{rd} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{3}(1-\frac{1}{3}-\frac{2}{9})=\frac{4}{27}\\
4^\text{th} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{3}(1-\frac{1}{3}-\frac{2}{9}-\frac{4}{27})=\frac{16}{81}\\
&&&\vdots
\end{align}
$$
There is a pattern emergeing here as it seems like what we are really describing is the sequence of
$$
\left(\frac{2^{n-1}}{3^n}\right)_{n\in\mathbb{N}_0}
$$
In order to convince ourself that this is no accident, let us go through the same process for with quarters. We get,
$$
\begin{align}
1^\text{st} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{4},\\
2^\text{nd} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{4}(1-\frac{1}{4})=\frac{3}{16}\\
3^\text{rd} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{4}(1-\frac{1}{4}-\frac{3}{16})=\frac{9}{64}\\
4^\text{th} \text{term}:&&&\frac{1}{4}(1-\frac{1}{4}-\frac{3}{16}-\frac{9}{64})=\frac{27}{256}\\
&&&\vdots
\end{align}
$$
The pattern is repeating as we are here facing the sequence of
$$
\left(\frac{3^{n-1}}{4^n}\right)_{n\in\mathbb{N}_0}
$$
This kind of pattern is no accident. In fact, it can be written as
$$
\left((1-\alpha)^{n-1}\alpha\right)_{n\in\mathbb{N}_0}
$$
The series of terms of this form always adds up to one as can be seen by looking at the following geometric series
$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\frac{1}{(1-\alpha)^{n-1}}=\frac{1}{\alpha}
$$
